Daniel Ryan
High Energy Physics, Tufts University, Boston, MA
3.26.2002

The following is a list of general changes made to the FastICA package 
for Matlab 5.x, Version 2.1, January 15 2001, Copyright (c) Hugo Gävert, 
Jarmo Hurri, Jaakko Särelä, and Aapo Hyvärinen, for compatibility with
GNU Octave, version 2.0.16 (i686-pc-linux-gnu) Copyright (C) 1996, 1997, 
1998, 1999, 2000 John W. Eaton.

1. GUI CAPABILITIES  
Octave has (as of this date) no GUI capabilities.  Therefore Octave is
only able to successfully execute "fastica.m", the command-line version 
of FastICA.  All changes to the FastICA package were made to fastica.m and 
the functions called by it--see Contents.m.

2. BUILT IN FUNCTIONS  
The following two functions had to be explicitely changed in the code.

--'cov(X,1)' was changed to cov(X)*(N-1)/N, where N is the number of rows in 
  matrix X. Note that cov(X,1) will calculate the covariance matrix for the 
  first row in matrix X, whereas the Matlab cov(X,1) normalizes the covariance
  matrix by N (instead of N-1 as in cov(X)).

--'mod(X,Y)' does not exist in Octave and was explicitely written in as 
  X-Y.*floor(X/Y).

--'drawnow' does not exist in Octave and was remedied by placing the 'clg'
  command before excecuting 'plot' in a subplot structure.

--switch/case/otherwise structure was replaced with the if/ifelse/else 
  structure when the argument for switch was a string.  It appears that 
  Octave is unable to compare two strings of different length.  Instances of
  the switch structure with a numeric argument/comparison were left unchanged.

3. SINGLE FUNCTION FILES AND SCRIPTS
Octave will recognize two different types of function files--single function
files and script files.  If a file begins with "Funtion..." then Octave 
assumes that only one function is defined in this file, and will complain if 
it finds anycode after "endfunction".  In order for multiple functions to be 
defined, a file must begin with anything else, for example "1;" in which case 
Octave will treat the file as a script.  Therefore the following single func-
tions files were created by extracting and the function and naming the file 
after the function name:

getSamples.m -- called in fpica.m
selcol.m -- called in pcamat.m

Also, the script file:

icaplotfunctions.m

is called at the end of icaplot.m and contains a bunch of functions originally 
defined at the the end of icaplot.m.

4. VARIABLE ARGUMENTS
Functions with variable arguments also have to be treated slightly differently 
in Octave.  In Matlab, the built-in function varargin{i} will point to the ith 
argument variable.  The closest equivalent in Octave is va_arg(); which gets 
the first argument variable and sets the pointer to the next argument variable. 
Concequences of this are reflected in the changed code.

5. PLOT MODES
The function icaplot is capable of plotting in different kinds of modes.  The 
so called 'classic' mode is simply an implementation of 'plot'.  The function 
fpica.m has been changed (added to) so that it takes an argument 'plottype' 
which corresponds to this plot mode.  The plot mode default is now set to 
'histogram' (in fpica.m), and the number of bins is hardwired to 100 (in 
icaplot.m).


Finally, it should be noted that the FastICA package for Octave has not been 
thoroughly tested for bugs.  Concequently, the results between the Octave and 
Matlab version of this package are NOT garaunteed.  If you find any "Matlab-to-
Octave-conversion" bugs (doubtless there are at least a few still in there), 
feel free to let me know at dryan@fnal.gov. 

** Some corrections to the code were made by Aapo Hyvärinen Oct 2005
** which I markes as %%Aapo removed:
